h1. Changelog

h2. 0.4.1 - 2017-08-21

* *Really* compatible with Textpattern 4.6.2.
* Update to mysqli_() calls and PHP 5 class functiun signatures.

h2. 0.4.0 - 2017-08-19

* Compatible with Textpattern 4.6.2.

h2. 0.3.0 - 2012-09-12

* Compatible with Textpattern 4.5.0.
* Fixed PHP strtolower() warnings.
* Fixed file open warnings (thanks gomedia).
* Unbundled password strength meter into separate plugin.

h2. 0.2.0 - 2012-01-26

* Performance boost.
* Added separate XSS shield pref.
* Altered callback signature: event="smd_frognostics" to avoid clashes with the admin side.
* Fixed a few warnings.
* Password strength meter integrated with smd_user_manager.
* Fixed array_merge()-requires-array-argument snafu.
* Added CSRF tokens.
* Fixed rogue status message when viewing alarms panel.

h2. 0.1.7 - 2010-12-30

* Added injection sensitivity to try and minimise false positives on sites that accept comments.
* Fixed loss of settings on switching prognostics subtab.

h2. 0.1.6 - 2010-12-09

* Never assume English button names (thanks roelof).

h2. 0.1.5 - 2010-12-09

* Improved warning display when saving preferences (thanks maniqui).
* Skipped comment preview step for sql injections.
* Fixed version number in frognostics.
* Fixed display error on Advice panel.
* Added @sql_injection@ callback.
* Added RPC advice check.

h2. 0.1.4 - 2010-11-16

* Added forensic options for header spoofing/SQL injections.
* Can now throw HTTP response code or custom message/form instead of 'nice try'.
* Wildcard ability for ignored files.
* Added user check and Txp dir option (thanks maverick).

h2. 0.1.3 - 2010-11-15

* Alarms panel now always displays all alerts and doesn't interfere with file checking rotation.
* Fixed incorrect URL in acknowledge messages (thanks thebombsite) though multi-site installations may still be wrong.
* Removed dumb admin-side SQL injection.
* Added @Check files between@ and Txp version advice (all thanks ruud).
* Tweaked injection detector.
* Refactored e-mail header code.

h2. 0.1.2 - 2010-11-12

* Fixed white screen of death on Files _Save_ (binary files are now left unprocessed).
* Improved performance.
* Added file quantity check.

h2. 0.1.1 - 2010-11-11

* Added Ignore button.

h2. 0.1.0 - 2010-11-11

* Initial release.
